docs: update ory permissions intro (#1291)
ory/docs: docs/keto/index.md

---
id: index
title: Introduction to Ory Permissions
sidebar_label: Introduction
---

# Introduction

Ory Permissions is a modern permission system you can use to create a complete authorization system for your application or
website, no matter the size or the complexity of the ACLs (access-control lists) your use case requires. Ory Permissions, based on
the open-source Ory Keto Permission Server, is the first open-source implementation of the design principles and specifications
described in [Zanzibar: Google's Consistent, Global Authorization System](https://research.google/pubs/pub48190/).

Implementing the design principles described in the Zanzibar paper allows Ory Permissions to offer the following benefits over

> older, widely adopted permission systems:

Reviewer: Update it here?

> older, widely adopted permission systems:

Author: Missed it initially. Done now :)

- Flexibility: Older permission systems typically rely on a fixed set of permissions and access control rules that are difficult
  to customize or modify. Ory Permissions provides a flexible data model you can customize to fit a wide range of use cases.
  Creating custom permission models is aided by Ory Permission Language, a developer-friendly, TypeScript-based configuration
  language.

- Scalability: While traditional permission systems often struggle to handle large-scale applications and services with high
  request volume, Ory Permissions is designed to be highly scalable and handle a large number of concurrent requests without
  sacrificing performance or reliability.

- Consistency: In older permissions systems, the data is often eventually consistent, which leaves windows of opportunity for
  potential unauthorized access to resources before the data is correctly propagated to all parts of the system. By implementing
  Zanzibar, Ory Permissions puts consistency in the spotlight and ensures that permission checks that are at the critical path of

>   user experience, are always answered correctly.

Reviewer 2: Without Zookies, we also only have eventual consistency. So we can't really claim that yet.

With Ory Permissions, you can:

> - Use Ory Permission Language to create permission models that fit your exact use case - RBAC, ABAC, and beyond.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use the Ory Permission Language to create permission models that fit your exact use case - RBAC, ABAC, and beyond.
```

- Unify authorization logic in one service that's the single source of truth for access rights across all of your applications.
- Be tech-stack agnostic and use Ory Network [SDKs](./sdk/01_overview.md) available for all major programming languages.

> - Issue fine-grained permissions, for example `user x can read document y`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Issue fine-grained permissions, for example `User:x is in readers of Document:y`.
```

- Allow permissions inheritance through groups, roles, and hierarchies to ensure organic scaling that follows the growth of your
  application.

## Ory Permission Language

The Ory Permission Language (OPL) is a developer-friendly, [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)-based configuration

> language designed to have a low learning curve and a familiar source in contrary to other, proprietary languages used to represent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
language designed to be easy to learn and have a familiar source in contrary to other, proprietary languages used to represent
```

Reviewer 2: Learning curve metaphors are really broken IMHO, as a steep curve is actually a good thing (you learn things quickly), but has a bad connotation.

Author: Updated with a version that mixes your and Patrik's suggestion :)

> The Ory Permission Language (OPL) is a developer-friendly, [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)-based configuration
> language designed to have a low learning curve and a familiar source in contrary to other, proprietary languages used to represent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ory Permission Language (OPL) is a developer-friendly configuration language defined as a subset of [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/).
It is designed to have a low learning curve and a familiar source in contrary to other, proprietary languages used to represent
```
